Challenges Faced While Building AquaScan
=========================================


1. Training the CNN Model Was Extremely Time-Consuming

   Challenge:
   Training the model was honestly one of the most frustrating parts of the
   entire project. Each training run took anywhere from 30 minutes to over
   an hour depending on the number of epochs, and when something went wrong
   — which happened a lot — I had to start all over again. Early on, the
   model was severely overfitting: it would hit 85% accuracy on training
   data but drop to 38% on test images, which was basically useless. I
   spent days tweaking hyperparameters, adjusting the learning rate,
   adding data augmentation, trying different optimizers, and re-running
   the training pipeline over and over. Every small change meant another
   long wait to see if it actually helped. There were also constant errors
   with tensor shape mismatches, deprecated PyTorch parameters, and CUDA
   memory issues that would crash the training mid-way through.

   Solution:
   I switched from the basic Adam optimizer to AdamW with a cosine
   annealing learning rate schedule that included a warmup phase for the
   first few epochs. This gave the model a gentler start and helped it
   converge more smoothly. To tackle the overfitting, I added stronger
   data augmentation — horizontal flips, vertical flips, random rotation,
   color jitter, random affine transforms, grayscale conversion, and
   random erasing. I also introduced early stopping with a patience of 12
   epochs so the training would automatically stop when the model stopped
   improving, instead of me wasting time on unnecessary epochs. For the
   tensor shape errors, I wrote a helper function that dynamically
   calculates the flatten size based on the input image dimensions, so
   the model architecture adjusts itself automatically.


2. Integrating the CNN Model With Flutter Was Tough

   Challenge:
   Getting the trained model to actually work inside the Flutter app was
   way harder than I expected. The model was trained in PyTorch, so I had
   to export it to ONNX format, then serve it through a FastAPI backend,
   and have the Flutter app communicate with it over HTTP. Each layer of
   this pipeline had its own set of problems. The ONNX export would fail
   silently or produce a model that gave completely different results than
   the PyTorch version. The multipart image upload from Flutter kept
   getting rejected by the backend with 400 Bad Request errors because
   Android's image picker sends files with a generic content type instead
   of "image/jpeg." Figuring out why the app was sending images correctly
   on the emulator but failing on a real phone took a lot of trial and
   error.

   Solution:
   I built the integration in layers and tested each one independently
   before connecting them. First, I verified the ONNX export by running
   inference on test images directly in Python and comparing the results
   to PyTorch outputs. Then I built a smoke test script that sends an
   image to the FastAPI endpoint and checks the response. For the 400
   Bad Request issue, I added explicit MIME type detection on the Flutter
   side using the http_parser package — the app now reads the file
   extension and sets the correct content type (image/jpeg, image/png,
   etc.) before uploading. On the backend side, I relaxed the validation
   to accept "application/octet-stream" as a fallback, since the actual
   image validity is checked during preprocessing anyway.


3. Preprocessing Mismatch Between Training and Inference

   Challenge:
   This was probably the biggest hidden bug in the entire project. During
   training, images were being stretched to 150x150 pixels, but during
   inference on the backend, they were being center-cropped to a square
   first and then resized. This meant the model was seeing fundamentally
   different images at prediction time compared to what it was trained on.
   The result was that real camera photos consistently got very low
   confidence scores — sometimes below 30% — even when the disease was
   clearly visible. It took a while to realize the issue was not with the
   model itself but with how the images were being prepared.

   Solution:
   I wrote a custom CenterCropSquare transform class and applied it to
   both the training and inference pipelines. Now both sides do the exact
   same steps: take the image, crop it to a square from the center, resize
   to 150x150 using LANCZOS resampling, convert to a float array, and
   normalize by dividing by 255. I also added EXIF orientation handling on
   the backend so that photos taken in portrait mode on a phone get
   rotated correctly before processing. After aligning both pipelines, the
   predictions became noticeably more accurate and consistent, and the
   confidence scores on real camera images jumped significantly.


4. Running the App on a Physical Android Device

   Challenge:
   Getting the app to work on my actual phone (Nothing A059) instead of
   the emulator was a whole separate challenge. On the emulator, the app
   could reach the backend at 10.0.2.2, but on a real phone, I had to
   figure out my PC's local IP address and manually configure it in the
   Flutter code. Then I had to make sure both devices were on the same
   Wi-Fi network, enable cleartext HTTP traffic in the Android manifest,
   and deal with USB debugging permissions. On top of that, the phone's
   screen size was different from the emulator, which caused UI overflow
   errors that never showed up during emulator testing — like the wave
   header overflowing by 6.8 pixels and the bottom navigation bar not
   fitting properly.

   Solution:
   I set up the Flutter API service with smart defaults — it automatically
   uses 10.0.2.2 for emulators and a configurable LAN IP for physical
   devices, so I only need to change one constant when switching between
   test setups. I ran "ipconfig" to find my PC's IPv4 address and
   hardcoded it as the LAN IP. I added android:usesCleartextTraffic="true"
   to the AndroidManifest.xml to allow HTTP connections on the local
   network. For the UI overflow, I replaced fixed-size layouts with
   flexible ones using Spacer widgets, reduced padding and font sizes in
   the wave headers, and tested on the actual phone after every UI change
   to catch overflow issues immediately instead of discovering them later.


5. Constant Dependency and Version Conflicts

   Challenge:
   Python dependency management was a recurring headache. At one point,
   my system Python got updated to version 3.14, which broke the entire
   backend because pydantic_core didn't have compiled binaries for that
   version yet. The FastAPI server just refused to start with a cryptic
   "No module named pydantic_core._pydantic_core" error. I had to figure
   out that the issue was the Python version, not a missing package, and
   recreate the virtual environment using Python 3.13 instead. There were
   also issues with onnxruntime-gpu needing specific CUDA DLLs, PyTorch's
   ReduceLROnPlateau removing its "verbose" parameter in newer versions,
   and Flutter packages throwing symlink warnings on Windows.

   Solution:
   I used the Python Launcher (py -3.13) to explicitly create the virtual
   environment with a known compatible Python version, bypassing the
   system default. This guaranteed that all compiled packages like
   pydantic_core and onnxruntime would have matching binary wheels. For
   the deprecated PyTorch parameters, I checked the PyTorch changelog and
   removed the unsupported arguments. I also set up the backend with a
   run_backend.bat script that automatically creates the venv if missing
   and installs dependencies, so anyone cloning the project can get
   started without manually troubleshooting version issues.


6. Handling Class Imbalance in the Dataset

   Challenge:
   The Kaggle dataset wasn't perfectly balanced — some disease classes had
   more images than others. This caused the model to get lazy and just
   predict the majority class most of the time. I had to implement
   inverse-frequency class weights in the loss function so that
   underrepresented classes got more importance during training. I also
   added Mixup augmentation and label smoothing to prevent the model from
   being too confident on any single class. These changes helped, but
   getting the right combination of techniques took multiple training
   runs to figure out.

   Solution:
   I wrote a compute_class_weights function that reads the training split
   CSV, counts images per class, and calculates inverse-frequency weights.
   These weights were passed directly to PyTorch's CrossEntropyLoss so
   the model penalizes mistakes on rare classes more heavily. On top of
   that, I added label smoothing at 0.05 so the model doesn't become
   overconfident, and Mixup augmentation (alpha=0.1) which blends pairs
   of training images together to create synthetic examples that help the
   model generalize better. The combination of these three techniques
   brought the per-class F1 scores much closer together and reduced the
   gap between the best and worst performing classes.


7. UI Overflow and Layout Issues on Different Screens

   Challenge:
   Flutter's layout system is powerful but unforgiving. The wave-shaped
   headers I designed looked great on larger screens but overflowed on
   my phone because SafeArea insets consumed more space than I accounted
   for. The "AI Ready" badge, the navigation bar icons, and the text
   sizes all had to be reduced and the padding adjusted to prevent
   overflow errors. The scan history screen also had a bug where it
   wouldn't update after a new scan because it was inside an IndexedStack
   that doesn't rebuild child widgets when you switch tabs. I had to
   refactor the history service into a ChangeNotifier so the screen could
   listen for updates automatically.

   Solution:
   For the overflow, I reduced the header padding from 12/40 to 8/32,
   shrank icon sizes from 24px to 22px, reduced font sizes, and added
   Spacer widgets at the top of header columns so content pushes to the
   bottom naturally instead of relying on fixed positioning. I removed
   the "AI Ready" badge entirely to free up space in the header row. For
   the scan history bug, I refactored ScanHistoryService to extend
   Flutter's ChangeNotifier class. Now it calls notifyListeners() whenever
   a scan is added or cleared, and the history screen subscribes via
   addListener in initState. This means the history list updates in
   real-time the moment a new scan completes, regardless of which tab
   the user is on.


8. setState() Returning a Future Warning

   Challenge:
   A subtle but annoying bug was that Flutter kept throwing "setState()
   callback argument returned a Future" warnings in the console. This
   happened because I was using arrow functions like
   setState(() => _future = asyncMethod()) where the assignment
   expression itself returned a Future. It didn't cause visible bugs but
   cluttered the debug console and could potentially cause issues. The
   fix was simple — change arrow functions to block bodies — but finding
   all the instances across multiple screens took careful searching.

   Solution:
   I searched the entire codebase for every setState call that used an
   arrow function returning an async result. The fix was straightforward:
   change setState(() => _future = asyncMethod()) to
   setState(() { _future = asyncMethod(); }) using a block body instead
   of an arrow. The block body doesn't return the Future, so Flutter's
   setState is happy. I found and fixed this in two places — the result
   screen's retry function and the disease library's retry button. After
   the fix, the debug console was clean with no more warnings.


Lessons Learned
===============

- Always test on a real device from day one, not just the emulator.
  Bugs like MIME type issues and UI overflows only appear on real hardware.

- Preprocessing alignment between training and inference is critical.
  The single biggest accuracy improvement came from making sure both
  pipelines handle images in exactly the same way.

- Version-pin your Python dependencies or at least use a known stable
  Python version. A surprise system update can break everything.

- Small, incremental improvements to the model are better than trying
  to change everything at once. Each tweak (Mixup, class weights,
  cosine annealing) added measurable gains without breaking what worked.

- Build a smoke test early. Having a script that sends a test image to
  the backend and checks the response saved me hours of debugging
  during integration.

- Document every step of your pipeline — future you will thank you
  when something breaks at 2 AM and you can't remember which
  preprocessing step changed.
